Better spec for matrix identifiers (#1597)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/1597-id-grammar.md

Reviewer: With [exclusive appservice namespaces](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/application-service-api/#definition-registration), it is currently possible for appservices that are registered to unknowingly overlap with existing user IDs, room aliases, (and possibly in the future, [media IDs](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3896#discussion_r1563917917)). Ideally there should be some chars or some sigil reserved solely for usage with appservices to prevent this issue in the future.

the grammar above is a superset of the generated identifiers, and a subset of
the understood identifiers. There should therefore be no
backwards-compatibility problems with its introduction.

The exception is transaction IDs generated by some clients. I think that we'll
just have to fix those clients and accept that old versions may not work with
future servers.

### Call IDs

[Spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/unstable.html#m-call-invite)

These are only used within the body of `m.call.*` events, as far as I am
aware. They should be unique within the lifetime of a room. (Some
implementations currently treat them as globally unique, but that is considered
an implementation bug.)

[matrix-js-sdk](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk/blob/4d310cd4618db4e98a8e6b5eb812480102ee4dee/src/webrtc/call.js#L72) uses `c[0-9.]{32}`.
[matrix-android-sdk](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-android-sdk/blob/5c6f785e53632e7b6fb3f3859a90c3d85b040e7f/matrix-sdk/src/main/java/org/matrix/androidsdk/call/MXWebRtcCall.java#L221) uses `c[0-9]{13}`.

Additional proposal:

> Call IDs should be long enough to make clashes unlikely.

> ### Media IDs

Reviewer 2: cross-linking https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/503#issuecomment-1934863270 for updated state of the world.

[Spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/unstable.html#put-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-send-eventtype-txnid)

These are generated by the client. They only need to be unique within the
context of a single access_token/device.

Synapse doesn't appear to do any sanity-checking here currently.

[matrix-js-sdk](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk/blob/c6b500bc09994ab5924ef8aab9bd10fc7ded5dae/src/base-apis.js#L123)
uses `m[0-9]{13}.[0-9]{1,}`.
[matrix-android-sdk](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-android-sdk/blob/088414fb187cae341690c3a01493b87d97f0169f/matrix-sdk/src/main/java/org/matrix/androidsdk/rest/model/Event.java#L503)
uses a room ID plus a timestamp, hence kinda could be anything, but certainly
will include a `!`.

### Device IDs

[Spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/unstable.html#relationship-between-access-tokens-and-devices)

These are normally generated by the server on login. It's possible for clients
to present their own device_ids, but we're not aware of this feature being
widely used.

They are used between users and across federation for E2E and to-device
messages. They need to be unique for a particular user. They also appear in key

> IDs and must therefore be a subset of that grammar.

Reviewer 3: I think this means that the Device ID would appear within the `tok` part of the `key_id` defined previously. If so, could this sentence be updated to clarify this?

> IDs and must therefore be a subset of that grammar.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
IDs and must therefore be a subset of the `tok` grammar.
```

[Synapse](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/74854a97191191b08101821753c2672efc2a65fd/synapse/handlers/device.py#L89)
generates device IDs with `[A-Z]{10}`. It appears to do little sanity-checking
of client-generated device IDs currently.

Additional proposal:

> > Device IDs must not exceed 31 characters in length.

Reviewer 3: I counter-propose that at least 36 characters should be allowed so that `-` separated UUIDs can be use.

Furthermore adopting a minimum length of 10 characters could be sensible

Reviewer 2: why 10 and not 1 as a minimum?

Reviewer 3: My thinking was that it would encourage a degree of uniqueness.

>
> ```
> key_id         = algorithm ":" tok
>
> algorithm      = 1*31 alg_chars
>
> tok            = 1*31 tok_chars
>
> alg_chars      = %x61-7a / %30-39 / "_" / "."
>                     ; a-z 0-9 _ .
>
> tok_chars      = ALPHA / DIGIT / "." / "=" / "_" / "-"
>                     ; A-Z a-z 0-9 . = _ -
> ```
>

Note that enforcing this grammar will mean:

* Making sure that synapse handles "=" characters in key IDs (easy).

* Making libolm not put + and / characters in key IDs (easy enough, but there
  will be a bunch of malformed unique keys out there in the wild. Possibly they
  would just get thrown away. Servers may need to continue to tolerate `+` and
  `/` in e2e keys for a while.)

## Opaque IDs

[Issue](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/666)

This is a class of identifier types where nobody is really meant to parse any
part of the ID - they are just unique identifiers (with varying scopes of
uniqueness). See below for discussion on what is currently in use.

I propose to specify the almost the same grammar for all of these, for
simplicity and consistency.

Proposal:

> Opaque IDs must be strings consisting entirely of the characters

> > `[0-9a-zA-Z.=_-]`. Their length must not exceed 255 characters and they must

Author: I don't remember the reason for including `=` and excluding `~` here.

I suspect the reason was for parity with the current spec for User IDs (which allows `[0-9a-z.=_/-]`), but that seems a bit of a false goal. It would make more sense to restrict it to the characters which [do not need URL-encoding](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-2.3): `[0-9a-zA-Z._~-]`.

Author: I've made this change in d6b704a.
